RFC: Client Controlled Nullability (#895)
graphql/graphql-spec: spec/Section 5 -- Validation.md

  * Let {typeA} be the return type of {fieldA}.
  * Let {typeB} be the return type of {fieldB}.
  * Let {fieldARequiredStatus} be the required status of {fieldA}
  * Let {fieldBRequiredStatus} be the required status of {fieldB}

>   * Let {typeA} be the result of {ModifiedOutputType(typeA, fieldARequiredStatus)}

Author: Am I allowed to reference functions defined in other documents? `ModifiedOutputType` is defined in `Execution.md`

Reviewer: Yes! that's okay.

However you should not redefine a variable. In spec-pseudo-programming "Let {x} be" means `const x =`

Author: Ah I was pulling this pattern from line 438 in the same file. I'll create a new variable.

}
```

The same is true if a field is designated `Non-Nullable` in an operation. In
this case, `someValue` could be either a `String` or a `String!` which are two
different types and therefore can not be merged:

```graphql counter-example
fragment conflictingDifferingResponses on Pet {
  ... on Dog {
    someValue: nickname
  }
  ... on Cat {
    someValue: nickname!
  }
}
```

### Client Controlled Nullability Designator List Dimensions

**Formal Specification**

- For each {field} in the document
  - Let {fieldDef} be the definition of {field}
  - Let {fieldType} be the type of {fieldDef}
  - Let {requiredStatus} be the required status of {field}
  - Let {designatorDepth} be the number of square bracket pairs in
    {requiredStatus}

>   - Let {typeDepth} be the number of list dimensions in {fieldType}

Reviewer 2: more common term 'rank'

>   - Let {typeDepth} be the number of list dimensions in {fieldType}

Reviewer 2: number of dimensions is more like matrixes: M[i, j, k] - dimension 3; Graphq does not have these; what we have is rank (I believe)

>   - Let {typeDepth} be the number of list dimensions in {fieldType}

Reviewer 3: PostgreSQL uses `dimensions` (and does not mention "rank"):

> `array_ndims ( anyarray )` → `integer`
> Returns the number of dimensions of the array.
> `array_ndims(ARRAY[[1,2,3], [4,5,6]])` → `2`

C (and thus probably all C-style languages) uses dimensions; the manual page for arrays doesn't mention the term "rank": https://www.gnu.org/software/gnu-c-manual/gnu-c-manual.html#Multidimensional-Arrays

Haskell seems to use dimensions (this page on arrays doesn't mention "rank"): https://www.haskell.org/tutorial/arrays.html

Fortran uses rank, but defines rank as the "number of dimensions": https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/xffbg/121.141?topic=basics-rank-shape-size-array 

.NET uses rank, but quickly defines it as "number of dimensions": https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.array.rank?view=net-6.0

I think "number of dimensions" is the most universal term, and "rank" is a shorthand used in some languages.

>   - Let {typeDepth} be the number of list dimensions in {fieldType}

Reviewer 4: From the .NET link above, note that at least in some languages, jagged arrays, i.e. arrays of arrays that need not be the same length, have rank/dimension of 1 rather than being truly multidimensional. Off the cuff, this is not of major concern, as the rank/dimension referred to seems to be most important there in terms of memory management. Although, I agree that the term "depth" more accurately describes what we have in GraphQL. Perhaps we can define depth even without the use of "dimension" at all.

}
```

The same is true if a field is designated `Non-Nullable` in an operation. In
this case, `nickname` could be either a `String` or a `String!` which are two
different types and therefore can not be merged:

```graphql counter-example
fragment conflictingDifferingResponses on Pet {
  ... on Dog {
    nickname
  }
  ... on Cat {
    nickname!
  }
}
```

### Client Controlled Nullability Designator List Dimensions

**Formal Specification**

- For each {field} in the document
  - Let {fieldDef} be the definition of {field}
  - Let {fieldType} be the type of {fieldDef}
  - Let {requiredStatus} be the required status of {field}
  - Let {designatorDepth} be the number of ListNullability operators in
    {requiredStatus}
  - If {designatorDepth} is 0
    - return true
  - Let {typeDepth} be the number of list dimensions in {fieldType}

>   - If {typeDepth} equals {designatorDepth} or {designatorDepth} equals 0 return
>     true

Reviewer 5: What about this:
```suggestion
  - If {typeDepth} is greater or equal to {designatorDepth} return true
```
?

This way, `0` is just a particular case of a more generic rule that allows "skipping over the list items you want unchanged"

With this schema:
```graphql
type Query {
  field: [[String]]
}
```

This would all be valid:
```graphql
{
  # make the list required
  a: field! 
  # make the items of the list required
  a: field[!] 
  # make the items of the items of the list required
  a: field[[!]] 
}
```

I don't think it's going to be used that much but it's a more generic rule and avoids "0" as an outlier: everything that's not mentioned explicitely is untouched

Author: Someone will need to got back through the notes, but IIRC the concern with this was that it's not clear how to read a list operator with fewer dimensions than the list type it's being applied to. ie 

Does `[!] == [[!]]` or does `[!] == [[]!]`? @calvincestari will be leading a CCN discussion at the next working group meeting on August 3rd, and we'll also be having a CCN working group meeting on the 26th if you'd like to join that to discuss more: https://github.com/graphql/client-controlled-nullability-wg/blob/main/agendas/2023/2023-07-26.md

Reviewer 5: > Does `[!] == [[!]]` or does `[!] == [[]!]` ?

I think it would work like for a single dimension list. 

For this field definition `list1: [String]`, `list1!` is the equivalent of `list1[]!`, not `list1[!]` so it's just a generalisation of the "single list" case. Just like `! == []!`, I would expect `[!] == [[]!]` (modulo the [caveat from above](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/895#pullrequestreview-1540884946) about [] but that's something else).

> @calvincestari will be leading a CCN discussion at the next working group meeting on August 3rd, and we'll also be having a CCN working group meeting on the 26th if you'd like to join that to discuss more

I won't be able to join unfortunately but I'm working with Calvin so I'll discuss this with him :)!

Reviewer 6: I also think `[!] == [[]!]` makes sense.

But `If {typeDepth} equals {designatorDepth} or {designatorDepth} equals 0 return` allows future relaxing the rule to be  `If {typeDepth} is greater or equal to {designatorDepth} return true` without breaking queries. So would it be possible to advance as is and wait for the feedback from the community?

}
```

The same is true if a field is designated `Non-Nullable` in an operation. In this
case, `someValue` could be either a `String` or a `String!` which are two different

> types and therefor can not be merged:

Reviewer 2: therefore

```graphql counter-example
fragment conflictingDifferingResponses on Pet {
  ... on Dog {
    someValue: nickname
  }
  ... on Cat {
    someValue: nickname!
  }
}
```

### Client Controlled Nullability Designator List Dimensions

**Formal Specification**

* For each {field} in the document
  * Let {fieldDef} be the definition of {field}
  * Let {fieldType} be the type of {fieldDef}
  * Let {requiredStatus} be the required status of {field}
  * Let {designatorDepth} be the number of square bracket pairs in {requiredStatus}

>   * Let {typeDepth} be the number of list dimensions in {fieldType}

Author: Do I need to be more specific than this? I noticed `ASTVisitor` isn't part of the spec, so should I leave the implementation of this up to the reader's discretion, or should I describe how `ASTVisitor` functions in greater detail?

Reviewer 3: You could write a ListDepth(type) algorithm that recursively unwraps the type and adds one if it was a list type; however I think describing this process inline would probably be fine - something like “let listCount be the number of list wrapper types encountered whilst recursively unwrapping type”

Reviewer 3: (Written on mobile; do reference similar text to craft this more accurately)
